Title: Elon Musk’s Tesla plans to launch electricity supplier in Britain
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2023/jul/12/elon-musk-tesla-electric-supplier-britain
Content: Elon Musk’s Tesla is poised to disrupt Britain’s energy market with the launch of a new household supplier. The maker of electric cars, which also runs an energy supply business in the US, plans to begin selling electricity to homes and running “virtual power plants”, according to a recent job listing. The listing for Tesla Electric, which supplies electricity to households that own Tesla products such as cars or batteries, called for a new executive “with a healthy scepticism of the status quo” to manage the company’s entry into the UK market. The advert for a head of operations, which was first reported by the Daily Telegraph, said Tesla Electric would be able to “support the transition of the entire electricity grid to 100% renewables”. It is understood that Tesla may be planning to help customers who own a Tesla Powerwall battery, solar panels or one of its electric vehicles to store electricity when it is cheap, and sell electricity back to the grid when market prices are higher. This can help households avoid peaks in market prices when renewable electricity is in short supply, and help the grid do without fossil fuels by making better use of renewable electricity. Tesla first launched its household supply deals in Texas late last year, and offered drivers who bought its Model 3 car between May and June a year of free, overnight vehicle charging at home when they signed up with Tesla Electric as their retail electricity provider. After the first year, drivers would default to Tesla’s standard overnight charging rate of $1 a day. Tesla took its first step into the British market three years ago by applying to the energy regulator for Great Britain to be an electricity generator. Ofgem granted its licence in June 2020. At the time, industry observers speculated that Tesla might be planning to build large-scale battery storage projects in the UK, after its success building a 100MW storage scheme in less than 100 days in Australia. A generation licence would also allow Tesla to aggregate customers across the country and, in effect, create a virtual power plant. Similar tariffs for households with batteries or solar panels are already available from suppliers including Octopus Energy and Ovo Energy. Earlier this year, Tesla set out a “master plan” to eliminate fossil fuels from the world economy by relying on electrification and smart power storage technologies. Tesla’s report found that a sustainable energy economy was “technically feasible” and would require “less investment and less material extraction” than continuing to support an unsustainable energy economy. The company’s call to revolt against the fossil fuel industry by eliminating fossil fuels through a “hugely and politically difficult” carbon tax would not extend to Musk’s SpaceX venture.
Author: Jillian Ambrose Energy correspondent
------
Title: Tesla stock has only plunged to a less ludicrous level as competitors catch up | Nils Pratley
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2023/jan/04/tesla-stock-has-only-plunged-to-a-less-ludicrous-level-as-competitors-catch-up
Content: Only part of the plunge in Tesla’s stock market value can be pinned on Elon Musk’s misadventure with Twitter. Yes, selling a few tens of billions of dollars-worth of Tesla stock – far more than he signalled at the outset – to fund the purchase was bound to dampen the mood among investors in the back seat. And, yes, the distraction factor is serious; Tesla’s non-executive directors should be screaming at the boss to get back to the day job. But the main cause of Tesla’s decline from a $1.2tn valuation to today’s £350bn is surely very simple: the stock was ludicrously overpriced in the first place. Investors were required to believe that revenues could keep rocketing for years and competitors’ attempts to catch up with electric vehicles would barely affect Tesla’s profit margins. If such a plotline seemed unlikely, Jeremy Grantham, British co-founder of Boston-based fund manager GMO and a student of stock market bubbles, offered a recent historical perspective a year ago to explain exactly how far-fetched it was. Tesla was being valued at “many multiples” of the price-to-sales ratios that had been achieved by members of the big-tech Faang club at the same stage of their corporate development, he pointed out. The market was assuming Musk’s creation would not only be as brilliantly successful as the likes of Facebook, Apple, Amazon, Netflix and Google – “some of the greatest companies in the history of capitalism” – its success would put theirs in the shade. “This is a big ask,” Grantham said drily. You bet. Thus the stock market’s savage reaction this week to a miss by Tesla to its revenue targets makes perfect sense. The shortfall in sales wasn’t enormous and a growth rate of 40% for 2022 is still slick but, if 50% until eternity had been previously been assumed, the difference matters. It is evidence that competitors are already more than a minor irritant. The day was bound to arrive. It was always absurd to ignore the well-funded efforts of Ford, Honda, BMW, Toyota, Volkswagen et al. One should now assume the competitive field has changed permanently. As it is, Tesla seems to have had to work hard with discounts to keep sales roughly in step with its production schedule in the final quarter of 2022. None of which deflects from Tesla’s status as a great 21st-century company that has redefined its industry; it deserves its place in the tech pantheon. But, now the valuation bubble has burst and investors have learned that the price isn’t going to the moon, one can start to talk about a fair valuation. At the new level, Tesla is still valued at about 29 times projected earnings this year – earnings that some analysts, note, think will go sideways in 2023. In an automotive sector where the post-pandemic boom is fading, that is still a premium rating – just not an insane one. Musk still has a job to do to maintain it. Centrica is right to talk about credit balances Annoyed by how your energy supplier is sitting on hundreds of pounds of your cash as a credit balance? So you should be. As the outside world discovered a year ago when some of the smaller suppliers (plus Bulb, a bigger one) started going bust, the practice of using customers’ money as working capital is widespread, and widely abused. Ofgem, awakening from its regulatory slumbers last summer, seemed minded to do something about it. Companies had been using credit balances “like an interest-free company credit card”, declared chief executive Jonathan Brearley, threatening to insist that the cash should be ringfenced. In the autumn, however, he performed a U-turn. Ringfencing would only be insisted upon if a company is deemed over-reliant on deposits or doesn’t get its act together to meet tougher – we hope – financial resilience rules, Ofgem decided. That is the context of the appeal by Centrica, owner of British Gas, to Citizens Advice to join its campaign for suppliers to be obliged to disclose prominently to customers whether their credit balances would be fully protected in the event of corporate failure. Since Centrica adopted ringfencing voluntarily, one could say it has a vested interest here. But it is also right to keep banging the drum about credit balances. Energy suppliers should not be sitting on the equivalent of months-worth of bill payments in some cases. Let them find their own working capital, which is how life works in virtually every other industry. Ofgem’s lenience on this issue remains baffling.
Author: Nils Pratley
------
Title: Australian electric vehicle sales in first half of 2023 already higher than all of 2022, report says
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2023/jul/31/australian-electric-vehicles-ev-sales-rise-increase
Content: Electric vehicles are becoming increasingly popular among Australians, with sales during the first half of 2023 already eclipsing last year’s annual total, though the industry has warned a federal policy vacuum continues to harm consumer choice. The Electric Vehicle Council has also singled out the Victorian government as having “the world’s worst” approach to taxing EV ownership in its report on the state of the industry to be released on Monday. From January to June this year, 8.4% of new car sales in Australia were electric. In 2022, just 3.8% of new vehicle sales were electric. The 46,624 EVs sold in the first six months of the year take the number of EVs on Australian roads to roughly 130,000 – made up of about 109,000 battery powered cars and 21,000 hybrids – according to estimates from the Electric Vehicle Council. However, uptake has varied considerably between regions. EV sales have been strongest in the Australian Capital Territory, where 21.8% of new cars sold so far this year were electric, followed by 9% in New South Wales and Tasmania, 8.5% in Victoria, 7.7% in Queensland, 7.5% in Western Australia, 6.5% in South Australia and 2.4% in the Northern Territory. Market share is also heavily limited. Just three vehicles – Tesla’s Model Y and Model 3, and the BYD Atto 3 – account for more than 68% of the market in Australia. While there are 91 different electric cars, vans and utes on the market in Australia, most have very limited supply. Sign up for Guardian Australia’s free morning and afternoon email newsletters for your daily news roundup Every new electric car often sells out within hours of coming on to the market, Behyad Jafari, the Electric Vehicle Council’s chief executive, said. He estimated demand for EVs was double the actual sales figures, but consumers frequently placed orders that went unfulfilled and ultimately opted for a standard car instead due to the wait. Jafari said the lack of supply of EVs was a direct result of Australia’s lack of a new fuel-efficiency standard. Fuel-efficiency standards set by governments limit emissions from cars by creating a cap of carbon emissions across a manufacturer’s overall sales. This provides an incentive for manufacturers to supply low and zero-emissions vehicles and penalises companies that fail to do so. The Albanese government has promised, but not yet introduced, a fuel efficiency standard. As more right-hand drive countries, such as Thailand, introduce a standard, manufacturers are diverting more EVs away from the Australian market so as to not miss out on incentives, Jafari said. “Carmakers are essentially rewarded for sending their EVs to markets other than Australia. So [it’s] small wonder we remain at the back of the queue,” Jafari said. As a result, Jafari said supply of cheaper EVs is particularly dire. “If you want to buy a Tesla, fantastic, there’s more of them available here and Australians are buying them hand over fist, and that’s partly because they have higher margins on sales. It’s the more affordable options that, without incentives from a fuel-efficiency standard, manufacturers aren’t sending here.” He gave the example of cheaper Hyundai EV models, noting that 30,000 orders were placed last year, but only 700 were sent to Australia by the manufacturer. The Electric Vehicle council also rated each state and territory’s various policies towards EVs, including taxes, industry assistance and initiatives to help uptake across cars, trucks and buses. NSW and the ACT received the top ratings of 9/10, while the Northern Territory and Tasmania were rated lowest at 4/10. However the council savaged the Victorian government’s recent policy changes that it said were disincentivising the uptake of EVs. A controversial road user tax introduced in 2021 that makes electric vehicle drivers record and pay for every kilometre they travel – up to 2.8 cents this financial year – has been blamed for discouraging Victorians from embracing EVs. Motorists launched a legal challenge against the tax, which is being considered by the high court. In its May budget, the Andrews government abruptly announced it would end its $3,000 rebate on new electric vehicles under $68,740 by the end of June – almost a year earlier than planned. “Ultimately this approach, in addition to already having the world’s worst EV policy with respect to taxing EVs, risks jeopardising Victoria’s ability to achieve its own emission reduction targets,” the Electric Vehicle Council’s report said. A Victorian government spokesperson said: “The zero and low-emission vehicle distance-based charge ensures all road users pay their fair share towards the cost of maintaining the road network. “We’ve laid the groundwork to achieve our target of 50% of all light vehicle sales being ZEVs by 2030.”
Author: Elias Visontay Transport and urban affairs reporter
------
Title: Mexico gives Tesla a dedicated lane at the border to speed up crossing into the US
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2022/jul/22/mexico-us-tesla-border-crossing-suppliers
Content: Tesla has reportedly gained an exclusive lane at a remote US-Mexico border crossing after Elon Musk recently struck a deal with the “pro-business” state of Nuevo León. The electric car company’s suppliers traveling from Mexico into Texas can use a dedicated lane to speed up their crossing at the Colombia Solidarity site, Bloomberg reported, a less popular checkpoint just north of Laredo. Tesla relies on at least six suppliers in Nuevo León, which borders the US for about 10 miles and is closer to the car company’s new headquarters in Austin. The lane is for suppliers only, not Tesla owners. “It was a simple incentive,” Ivan Rivas, Nuevo León’s economy minister, told the outlet. “What we want is a crossing that’s much more expedited and efficient. And maybe there will be a lane for other companies in the future like there is for Tesla.” Tesla, which dissolved its press office, did not immediately respond to a request for comment. It’s unclear what, if any, incentive Tesla offered for the exclusive access or what the rules are for its use. The lane is reportedly only available one way as US officials have said US-managed crossings do not offer a dedicated lane for any company. “For northbound commercial trucks at the Colombia-Solidarity Bridge, currently there are only the regular cargo lanes and the Free and Secure Trade (Fast) lane, which is for the exclusive use of companies that are enrolled in the CBP-Trade Partnership against Terrorism (C-TPAT) program,” a CBP spokesperson told TechCrunch. “There is no separate, dedicated lane for Tesla or any specific company.” Border patrol agents told the outlet that it’s unusual to see a dedicated lane for a single company. Rivas told Bloomberg that Nuevo León is becoming an electro-mobility hub, and that he estimates 5% to 7% of investment in the state will come from the industry this year.
Author: Dani Anguiano in Los Angeles
------
Title: Number of electric vehicles on Australian roads soars as demand exceeds supply
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2023/feb/07/number-of-electric-vehicles-on-australian-roads-soars-as-demand-exceeds-supply
Content: The number of electric vehicles on Australian roads has almost doubled over the past year, growing from 44,000 at the beginning of 2022 to more than 83,000, according to research based on sales data released in the Electric Vehicle Council’s yearly recap. That figure is expected to top 100,000 in the coming months. Of the 83,000 in circulation, 79% are battery electric vehicles while 21% are plug-in hybrids. Sign up for Guardian Australia’s free morning and afternoon email newsletters for your daily news roundup Electric vehicles accounted for 3.8% of all new vehicle sales in Australia in 2022, however their market share varies dramatically by region. Market share was strongest in the Australian Capital Territory, with almost 10% of all new cars bought in 2022 being electric, up from 5% in 2021. Electric vehicle market share was 4% in New South Wales and Victoria and slightly more than 3% in Queensland in 2022, but just 1% in the Northern Territory. Tesla Model 3 was the most bought EV model in 2022, with 10,877 sold, while 8,717 Tesla Model Ys were sold. Charging infrastructure – which was seriously challenged over the summer holidays with long queues for chargers at regional facilities – has also improved, but not at the same pace as electric car sales. Public chargers increased from 3,413 in 2021 to 4,943 in 2022, with fast chargers up from 231 to 365 in the same period. The report specifically calls for more multi-bay, ultrafast charging sites to be built in regional areas at a “reasonable spacing, so that drivers are able to recharge when making long trips”, as well as in urban areas for drivers who can’t charge their cars at their homes. Electric Vehicle Council chief executive, Behyad Jafari, said the number of EVs in Australia would tick over to 100,000 sometime this year, with even bigger growth forecast than in 2022. Jafari said every electric vehicle in Australia is sold out, and that they’re “often sold out within hours of being made available to the Australian market”. “Demand far outstrips supply, Australians are lined up ready to buy electric vehicles,” he said. Jafari said ensuring greater electric vehicle uptake was important not only for the environment, but because as a country “we don’t want to rely on foreign oil”. “The enthusiasm is there in abundance, we just need our governments to continue the policy reform that makes it easy to transition away from the exhaust pipe.” More than 440 submissions to the federal government’s National Electric Vehicle Strategy were published on Friday, revealing widespread support for changes that could lower the price of EVs. In total, the consultation attracted more than 500 submissions representing more than 2,150 individuals. There were also calls for more local production of lithium batteries, electric buses and trucks, however respondents were divided over whether to ban the sale of petrol or diesel cars from being sold in Australia, and whether motorists should pay to keep them on roads. Most organisations, from energy suppliers to climate groups, revealed their support for a fuel-efficiency standard in Australia that would encourage car brands to bring more electric vehicles into the country. The Clean Energy Council went a step further in its submission, setting a deadline of January 2024 for the introduction of “an ambitious and robust” standard. The measure, which has already been introduced in the European Union, the US and New Zealand, would set a limit for pollution across a car brand’s entire fleet, and introduce penalties if they failed to meet it. In its submission, climate action non-profit Boundless Earth called for the government to consider removing internal combustion engine vehicles from sale by 2030, while the Australian Electric Vehicle Association named 2035 as a deadline. But the Australian Automotive Dealer Association argued any electric vehicle policy should explicitly “rule out” plans to ban petrol vehicles to give the industry certainty. The federal government is expected to respond to the submissions before the May budget. With AAP
Author: Elias Visontay Transport and urban affairs reporter
------
Title: China accused of scores of abuses linked to ‘green mineral’ mining
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/world/2023/jul/05/china-mineral-mining-green-energy
Content: A new report into China’s dominance in the green-energy market has identified more than a hundred allegations of environmental and human rights violations linked to its overseas transition mineral investments over the past two years. China dominates the processing and refining of lithium, cobalt, copper, manganese, nickel, zinc, chromium, aluminium and rare-earth elements – and the manufacturing of technologies like solar panels, wind turbines and batteries for electric vehicles (EV), which require so-called transition minerals. The Business &amp; Human Rights Resource Centre (BHRRC), a corporate watchdog that tracks the local impact of thousands of global businesses, identified 102 alleged abuses in 2021 and 2022 linked to Chinese mining interests spanning 18 countries. Copper is the mineral most frequently associated with allegations of harm, followed by nickel. The abuses include Indigenous rights violations, attacks against grassroots leaders, water pollution, ecosystem destruction and unsafe working conditions. The highest number of alleged abuses – 27 – were recorded in Indonesia, which has the world’s largest nickel reserve, followed by Peru, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Myanmar and Zimbabwe. More than 70% of the alleged violations were documented in these five countries where weak governance and human rights abuses have been widely reported, and where China is a major economic partner. The findings underline growing concerns that the transition to renewable energy is repeating unjust business practices that have long dominated fossil-fuel and mineral extractions, with Indigenous people, and marginalised rural and communities of colour most likely to bear the brunt of violations and least likely to benefit from the extracted natural resources. China is not alone. Allegations of human rights violations, environmental harms and labour abuses are rife in mining operations linked to Canadian, US, UK, Australian and European companies and investors – which has long been taking place alongside the extraction of fossil fuels, according to data collated by the watchdog and multiple other human rights and environmental groups. But experts have warned that the global dash for transition minerals needed for green-energy technologies threatens to provoke a new wave of land-grabs, water shortages, environmental damage and community conflicts as countries rush to meet their climate-action goals with little thought about the collateral damage. “The energy and land needed for exploration, extraction and processing of transition minerals leaves behind a significant carbon footprint, characterised by human rights abuses and puts more strain on scarce surface and ground water resources,” said Eric Ngang from Global Witness, which documented more than 300 assassinations of anti-mining activists between 2012 and 2021, the worst violence linked to any environmentally harmful industry. “While mining is needed for green transition, it will ramp up the [negative] impacts if appropriate regulations are not developed and implemented … as transnational companies and business enterprises seem to take advantage of weak governance,” Ngang added. China has been buying up overseas mines and investing heavily in mineral-rich countries like Indonesia and Zimbabwe, and is set to dominate the supply chain for years to come despite US and European efforts to diversify the market. Mining for transition minerals is often “the defining project for China’s relationship with these countries,” said Antonia Timmerman, an editor for the China Global South Project, a website, who has investigated Chinese involvement in Indonesia’s nickel mines. That means that abuses can be exacerbated by a lack of accountability from local partners and governments, who are keen to court investment from Chinese companies. “This is a dirty business,” Timmerman said. In Indonesia, for example, the government “can be very brutal when it comes to defending and protecting these companies, especially the large ones. This happened long before the EV phenomenon.” The report only includes alleged harms published by the media, academics and nonprofits related to the transition mineral supply chain, so the true number could be higher. It also suggests Chinese companies are failing to comply with Beijing’s commitments on transparency and human rights policies, with less than one in five of the Chinese firms responding to the allegations when approached by the Centre – compared to 56% of mining companies globally. In May, China’s mining industry business association launched a pilot mediation scheme for communities, workers and other stakeholders to file complaints against companies involved in any part of the minerals supply chain. It is the first grievance mechanism established by a Chinese industry association. But participation is voluntary and the scheme has no enforcement powers. “The core function of this mechanism is to promote and facilitate the parties to a dispute to have open communication channels … and facilitate problem resolution by providing professional advice and services,” said Li Yanling, one of the scheme’s principal researchers. But Chinese companies do not work in a vacuum, according to Betty Yolanda, director of regional programmes at BHRRC. “Many are suppliers to western buyers like Tesla, Ford and BMW … [who] need to be examined to check whether they have fulfilled their own due diligence responsibility across their supply chains.”
Author: Nina Lakhani Climate justice reporter, and Amy Hawkins Senior China correspondent
------
Title: Jeremy Hunt ‘poised’ to U-turn on energy bill support; oil falls on reports UAE considering leaving Opec – as it happened
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2023/mar/03/energy-firms-uk-government-support-price-guarantee-epg-economy-services-cost-of-living-business-live
Content: Time for a recap Britain’s energy suppliers are expecting the government to U-turn on a planned cut to energy support for households – but have been told by officials in the meantime to prepare two sets of bills for next month. The chancellor, Jeremy Hunt, is reportedly ‘poised’ to keep the energy price guarantee at its current level of support – which limits the typical annual household bill to £2,500 – beyond the end of March. Hunt, who is due to announce the budget on 15 March, had planned to make the guarantee less generous from April, raising it to £3,000. One-off support of £400 that was available over the winter is also due to end on 1 April. Campaigners have warned the price increase, if left unchecked, will plunge many thousands more families into poverty. Energy suppliers have been contacted by government officials with two sets of rates for units of gas and electricity – depending on whether Hunt decides to extend the current level of support. One energy chief executive said: “We have effectively loaded two sets of rates into our systems to test the billing and make sure the direct debits are correctly calculated. We’ve been told everything is leaning toward [remaining at] £2,500.” The government has not confirmed the U-turn but the Times reported on Friday that a Whitehall source said Hunt would cap bills at £2,500 for another three months, until July. The wholesale energy market is already betting prices will fall to more affordable levels over the summer. Money Saving Expert Martin Lewis believes there’s an 85% chance that the government will bow to pressure and maintain its current support for energy bills beyond April, to July. He told the Today Programme: We are not at the smoking gun stage that this is definitely happening, but I would say we are at 85% likelihood that the price won’t be going up. Oil prices have fallen after the Wall Street Journal reported that the UAE is having internal discussions about quitting the Opec producer group, due to a growing rift with Saudi Arabia. The move that could potentially leave it free to lift output, but has been denied by sources. On the economic front, the UK’s service sector returns to growth in February as business activity expanded at fastest pace since June 2022, a survey of purchasing managers has found. America’s service sector also expanded last month, two surveys show. But Ireland’s domestic economy fell into a technical recession at the end of last year. And world food commodity prices have fallen for the 11th month running, UN data shows. In other news… A Guardian investigation has found anecdotal evidence of a surge in debt cases across the country, as the cost of living crisis stretches household budgets. Women have been harder hit by the cost of living crisis because they tend to earn less, according to data from the Living Wage Foundation. It found that half a million more working women are paid below the real living wage than their male counterparts. A decade of austerity by the Conservative-led governments after 2010 resulted in more than half a trillion pounds of lost public spending and a weaker economy, a left-of-centre thinktank has calculated. In transport, the boss of HS2 has said that construction of the high-speed rail line could be further delayed in an effort to curb costs… … while Luton airport’s long-anticipated light rail link finally opens to passengers next week – a swift connection that has, somewhat unfairly, been billed as the most expensive train in Britain. Bakery chain Gail’s is the latest high-street chain hoping to serve its food through car windows, as it joins the move to drive-thru restaurants. The Cambridge-based chip designer Arm is to pursue a US-only listing this year, dealing a major blow to Rishi Sunak’s ambitions to make London the first choice for tech company flotations. And a Wassily Kandinsky masterpiece that had been stolen by the Nazis, who killed its owner in the Auschwitz concentration camp in 1944, has been sold for a record £37.2m at auction in London. Two surveys of America’s services companies have confirmed that they kept growing last month, despite higher borrowing costs. The Institute for Supply Management’s Services PMI came in at 55.1% for February, showing a very slightly slowdown from January when it was 55.2%. The survey found that business activity, new orders and employment all rose last month. Anthony Nieves, chair of the ISM’s services business survey committee, explains: “Business Survey Committee respondents indicated that they are mostly positive about business conditions. Suppliers continue to improve their capacity and logistics, as evidenced by faster deliveries. The employment picture has improved for some industries, despite the tight labor market. Several industries reported continued downsizing.” The rival survey of purchasing managers from S&amp;P Global also shows there was “a renewed expansion in business activity across the US service sector” in February. Its Services PMI returned to positive territory last month, at 50.6, up notably from 46.8 in January (any reading over 50 shows growth). Chris Williamson, chief business economist at S&amp;P Global Market Intelligence, said: “A return to growth of US service sector business activity in February for the first time in eight months has offset a decline in manufacturing output, helping stabilize the economy and hopefully avert a downturn in the first quarter. The upturn was led by a revival in spending on services by consumers and improved activity in the tech sector, but was also aided by a marked cooling in the recent downturn in financial services. The United Arab Emirates has no plans to leave the OPEC oil alliance, according to officials speaking on condition of anonymity to Bloomberg. Today’s reports that chancellor Jeremy Hunt is ‘poised’ to axe the increase to the Energy Price Guarantee are being welcomed by campaigners. But, there are also warnings that strugging households need more support. Adam Scorer, chief executive of fuel poverty charity National Energy Action, says: ‘If the Chancellor announces average annual energy bills will stay around £2,500 instead of soaring to £3,000, National Energy Action will welcome the news. But that still means bills have more than doubled since start of the crisis. And it would still leave 7.5 million UK households in fuel poverty. ‘Low-income households don’t just need prices to stay the same. The need for targeted support for the most vulnerable households is as urgent as ever and unless we tackle the least efficient housing stock in Europe, the poorest households will simply not be able to afford a warm and safe home.’ The report that the United Arab Emirates is considering leaving Opec is “far from the truth,” a source with direct knowledge of the matter has told Reuters. In the financial markets, the oil price is falling following a report that the United Arab Emirates is considering leaving the Opec cartel. The Wall Street Journal reports that relations between Saudi Arabia and the UAE have deteriorated as the two countries clash over oil and the direction of the Yemen war Once close friends, the WSJ says, the two biggest Arab economies are “increasingly competing for money and power”, having led an Arab military coalition that intervened in Yemen in 2015. The UAE pulled most of its ground forces from Yemen in 2019 but still fears being sidelined from discussions about its future as Saudi Arabia pursues direct talks with Houthi rebels on ending the war, Gulf officials told the Journal. Two of the biggest oil producers in the world, the Saudis and Emiratis have also had behind-closed-doors arguments over energy issues, it says. The WSJ report states: Within the Saudi-led Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries, the U.A.E. is obligated to pump much less than it is capable of, hurting its oil revenue. It has long pushed to pump more oil, but the Saudis have said no, OPEC delegates have said. Now, said Emirati officials say, the U.A.E. is having an internal debate about leaving OPEC, a decision that would shake the cartel and undermine its power in global oil markets. The Opec group sets production targets agreed by its members. Last October it made deep output cuts, in a snub to Joe Biden’s White House which was pushing for more oil to lower gasoline prices. The WSJ reports that US officials said the Emiratis told them privately that they wanted to pump more, in line with Washington’s wishes, but faced resistance from Saudi Arabia. Brent crude has dropped by over 1.5% today to $83.34 per barrel, with US crude also down 1.5% at around $77 per barrel. Jeremy Hunt is expected to extend support for household energy bills for an extra three months beyond April, a government source has told Reuters today. As we’ve been covering today, government support is scheduled to be scaled back from next month, meaning average annual bills would rise to £3,000 from £2,500 pounds now, but chancellor Hunt is set to extend it at the current level until June. We have some good news from Barclays – C.S. Venkatakrishnan, the bank’s chief executive, is in remission after completing three months of cancer treatment for non-Hodgkin Lymphoma. In a letter to staff today, Venkatakrishnan says: I am pleased to inform you that I have completed the treatment for Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma that I commenced last November. I am now in remission (no evidence of disease). Over the coming weeks, I plan to be working more from the office, and ultimately resuming travel. I am very grateful for the care I have received, using the Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Centre’s program available to all US employees. Equally, I wish to thank you for your thoughts, prayers, and kind notes. As always, I encourage you to pay close attention to your physical and mental wellbeing. If you or eligible members of your family have been diagnosed with cancer, please do make use of the support we provide to employees worldwide.” Barclays revealed in November that Venkatakrishnan was undergoing treatment after being diagnosed with non-Hodgkin lymphoma. UK housebuilder Vistry Group has told hundreds of employees they may lose their jobs as the company cuts costs in the midst of Britain’s housing slump, Bloomberg reports. They say: The London-listed homebuilder is weighing as many as 19 job cuts in each of its business units, with reductions expected to be in the region of 200, according to people with knowledge of the plans. The firm has begun redundancy consultations with affected employees in the roughly 5,000-strong workforce, said the people, who asked not to be identified because the plans aren’t public. More here: Homebuilder Vistry to Cut Hundreds of Jobs Amid UK Housing Slump Yesterday it emerged that larger rival Taylor Wimpey is planning to cut jobs, as the housebuilder warned of slowing sales. Warm This Winter, a coalition of 50 leading UK charities demanding immediate government action to lower energy bills now, are organising a Mass Lobby to demand help with energy bills. They warn that bills will be three times higher than two years ago if Jeremy Hunt doesn’t abandon his plan to lift the energy price guarantee to £3,000 per year for a typical household. UK Chancellor of the Exchequer Jeremy Hunt has asked energy companies to prepare for the curent energy price guarantee of £2,500 per year to be extended for another three months, Bloomberg’s Joe Mayes reports. Citing “a person familiar with the matter”, Mayes points out that the move follows pressure from charities and consumer groups: The Treasury did not immediately respond to a request for comment. The EPG was due to rise to £3,000 on April 1, and Hunt previously resisted calls to change course. He said in February that such a move would be too expensive for the Treasury. However, he’s since come under strong pressure from consumer groups and charities since to act, amid warnings of more people being pushed into fuel poverty. Hunt is due to deliver his spring budget on March 15, and economists expect he’ll have an extra £10 billion to work with thanks to better-than-expected tax receipts and lower whiolesale energy prices. However, Treasury officials caution that the fiscal picture is still difficult and Hunt has limited room for manoeuvre. Raising the EPG to £3,000 would have saved the government about £2.5 billion, according to consultancy Cornwall Insight. More here: Hunt Set to Extend UK Energy Bill Support Amid Campaign Pressure Ireland’s domestic economy has fallen into a technical recession, new official statistics show. Modified Domestic Demand (MDD), a broad measure of underlying domestic activity in the Republic of Ireland that covers personal, government and investment spending, fell by 1.3% in October-December. That follows a 1.1% drop in the third quarter of the year – meaning two consecutive quarters of contraction, the technical definition of a recession. MDD is used to strip out the impact of multinational companies based in Ireland, and ‘aircraft-related globalisation effects’, which can bolster gross domestic product statistics. According to the Central Statistics Office, Ireland’s GDP rose by 0.3% in the final quarter of last year, a sharp downgrade on the 3.5% growth initially recorded. For 2022 as a whole, Ireland’s GDP increased by 12.0%, the narrower Gross National Product (GNP) measure grew by 6.7%, while MDD increased by 8.2% last year. The CSO’s assistant director general with responsibility for Economic Statistics, Jennifer Banim, says: “The impacts of the conflict in Ukraine, the rise in inflation, and the continued unwinding of the COVID-19-related restrictions varied across the sectors of the economy in 2022 and today’s results show the overall annual impact and the underlying quarterly variations. Extending the current subsidies on household energy bills until the summer would cost a lot less than forecast last year. Barret Kupelian, senior economist at PwC, says wholesale energy prices are continuing to fall (they’re already down by two-thirds since in September). So with Ofgem’s price cap dropping from £4,279 per year in January to £3,280 in April, for a typical user, the cost of the subsidy will fall. In PwC’s predictions for the budget on 15 March, Kupelian says: We can expect the Chancellor to continue to provide support to households through delaying the increase in the Energy Price Guarantee. Wholesale energy prices are continuing on a downward trajectory and therefore the policy is likely to cost considerably less than forecast, and has been a substantial bulwark against inflationary pressures in the wider economy.” PwC also predict Hunt will try to address the UK’s labour shortages in the budget: We can expect some measures, such as health MOT programmes, to specifically support those who can return to work and also potentially targeted welfare measures to convert part-time workers into full-time workers. Britain’s energy suppliers are expecting the government to U-turn on a planned cut to energy support for households – but have been told by officials to prepare two sets of bills for next month, my colleague Alex Lawson explains. Chancellor Jeremy Hunt is under pressure to extend the energy price guarantee, a government policy which aims to limit annual household bills to £2,500 until the end of March. Hunt, who is due to deliver the budget on 15 March, had been planning to make the guarantee less generous from April, raising it to £3,000. One-off support of £400 is also due to end in April. Although, as flagged at 10.16am, Hunt is now said to be poised to extend the government’s £2,500 energy price guarantee until July. Energy suppliers have been contacted by government officials with two sets of rates for units of gas and electricity – depending on whether Hunt decides to extend the support, Alex explains. More here. The Times are reporting that Jeremy Hunt is “poised” to extend the government’s £2,500 energy price guarantee for a further three months, rather than lift it to £3,000 as planned. The move, which is expected by energy companies, is an effort to limit increases in people’s bills until the summer, and would protect households from a 20% hike in bills. A three-month extension would take us to July, when analysts expect Ofgem’s price cap to drop to around £2,100 per year (for a typical household), well below the government’s current guarantee. The Times’s Steven Swinford says: The energy price guarantee limits gas and electricity tariffs so that the typical household bill is no more than £2,500 a year. That ceiling was due to rise to £3,000 a year from April. The Times has been told that Hunt will retain the guarantee for three more months until wholesale prices have fallen so far that it becomes unnecessary. The government has told energy companies to prepare for the £2,500 energy price guarantee to remain in place. It will cost the government about £3 billion. A Treasury spokesman said no decision had been made. However, a Whitehall source confirmed that the guarantee was now expected to remain at £2,500. The UK’s service sector returns to growth in February as business activity expanded at fastest pace since June 2022, a survey of purchasing managers has found. Services firms reported that business activity and incoming new work both rose last month, for the first time since August 2022, as fears of an imminent recession fade. Signs of a turnaround in client confidence, helped by reduced political uncertainty and hopes that inflationary pressures would continue to ease in the months ahead lifted the sector, according to the S&amp;P Global / CIPS UK Services PMI. The Services PMI, which measures activity in the sector, jumped to 53.5 in February, up from 48.7 in January and above the 50-point mark that shows stagnation. Tim Moore, economics director at S&amp;P Global Market Intelligence, says: “UK service providers moved back into expansion mode in February as fading recession fears and improving business confidence resulted in the strongest rise in new orders since May 2022. However, elevated borrowing costs and stretched household finances remained constraints on growth. There was “clear evidence” that input price inflation has peaked, with the latest increase in average cost burdens the weakest since June 2021, Moore explains, adding: Service sector firms commented on lower fuel bills and transportation costs, alongside a gradual easing of broader inflationary pressures due to falling wholesale gas prices. However, many businesses also noted historically strong wage inflation and sharply rising food costs, especially those operating in the hotels and restaurants sector. However, firms only cut the charges of their own services marginally. The Economic Affairs Committee of the House of Lords has launched an inquiry into how the Bank of England’s operational independence was functioning. The committee plan to examine the BoE’s Role and remit, its governance and culture, and the level of accountability for its actions. They explain that that 2023 marks the 25th anniversary of the Bank of England Act 1998, which gave the UK’s central bank its independence and reformed its structure, responsibilities and functions. But, the committee say they won’t review specific policy decisions. The commitee is making a public call for written evidence, to be submitted by midday on 13 April 2023. You can learn more, and submit your views here. Short submissions are preferred. Bank independence came under strutiny last summer during the race to succeed Boris Johnson as prime minister. Liz Truss said she wanted to change the Bank of England’s mandate so it did a better job dealing with inflation. The BoE’s mandate is to set monetary policy (interest rates) to achieve the Government’s target of keeping inflation at 2% in the medium term. The committee membership includes former BoE governor Mervyn King, now Lord King of Lothbury, who should have some good insights into how Bank independence works. Nearly 50 offshore workers on several of BP’s North Sea installations have backed strike action in pursuit of a pay increase and overtime changes, British union Unite said on Friday. The strike involves crew working on BP’s Andrew, Clair, Clair Ridge, ETAP, Glen Lyon and Mungo installations in the North Sea, with “a series of 24 and 48-hour stoppages”, Unite said (via Reuters) Global food prices continued to fall last month, a development that could bring relief to strugging households around the world. The United Nations food agency’s world price index, which tracks the price of major food commodities, fell in February for a 11th consecutive month. The Food and Agriculture Organization’s (FAO) price index averaged 129.8 points last month, down from 130.6 for January, the agency said on Friday. This is the lowest reading since September 2021. The index is now down by almost 19% from a record high of 159.3 points hit last March following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. The FAO say that the “marginal decline” in the food index was due to significant drops in the price indices of vegetable oils and dairy, together with fractionally lower cereals and meat indices. Sugar price rose steeply, though. UK grocery prices have surged by 17% over the last year, market research group Kantar reported this week, a record for food inflation as supermarkets lift prices sharply. Fears that Europe’s companies are exploiting high inflation to increase their profit margins have prompted a warning from the European Central Bank that it is closely monitoring potential price gouging of consumers. Money Saving Expert Martin Lewis believes there’s an 85% chance that the government will bow to pressure and maintain its current support for energy bills from April. Lewis, who has been urging Jeremy Hunt not to lift energy bills by 20% next month, tells the Today programme that “I wouldn’t say it’s a done deal”. But, he’s increasingly confident that the chancellor will execute a u-turn, as some energy firms now expect (see opening post for details). Lewis has been saying all week that there was a greater than 50% chance of success in his campaign to freeze the Energy Price Guarantee at £2,500 per year for a typical household for another three months, from April until July. (Ofgem’s price cap is expected to fall below the EPG in July, meaning household bills would drop to an estimated £2,100 per year). Around 110 major charities now back this call, including Which?, Citizens Advice, Alzheimer’s Society and the Samaritans, and also trade body Energy UK. Lewis fears raising energy bills in April will hurt people’s mental health, and damage consumer confidence --- which is bad for businesses -- and also push up inflation. Lewis tells Radio 4’s Today Programme: It’s a bit of a no-brainer. It’s been a tough slog to get it through. Lewis explains that yesterday was the deadline for energy suppliers to tell prepayment meter providers what the new energy rates will be in April. What I have heard, is that some of the firms have kept it at the current rates. The point is that it’s easier for energy companies to keep the rates at the £2,500 per year level and then lift it to £3,000 (if Hunt doesn’t u-turn), than to hike and then try to backpay to customers, Lewis explains. Lewis has heard that energy firms have not been told that the rate is staying. But, they have been told “there is an attempt to keep the rate at £2,500”, and explains: We are not at the smoking gun stage that this is definitely happening, but I would say we are at 85% likelihood that the price won’t be going up. Earlier this week, energy Secretary Grant Shapps said he was “very sympathetic” to calls to protect households from the increase. Nearly half (49%) of people have put off vehicle repairs due to rising living costs, a survey has found. More than a third (39%) are concerned their car will break down due to neglect while 56% are concerned about how they would be able to afford any repairs, the research by Censuswide among more than 2,100 people whose household owns a vehicle found. More than half (54%) of motorists also said they had started trying to use their vehicle less to save money, according to the survey in February for Nationwide Building Society’s FlexPlus account. James Broome, head of current accounts at Nationwide Building Society, said: “ Keeping on top of car maintenance is a key step to avoiding the nasty surprise of a large one-off expense. “Also, having a reliable breakdown cover in place will mean that you won’t be left stranded.” (via PA Media). Elsewhere in the cost of living crisis, the cost of both petrol and diesel fell for the fourth consecutive month in February at the UK pumps. Diesel drivers continue to be overcharged, though, motorist body the RAC argues. Last month, the average price of a litre of unleaded fell by a penny to 147.72p, while diesel dropped 3.19p to 167.19p. This means it now costs £81.25 to fill a 55-litre family petrol car £81.25, compared with over £100 back in June, or £91.95 for diesel. Diesel drivers are paying “a needlessly high price” every time they fill up, the RAC says, though: Despite there being just a 6p difference between the wholesale prices of both diesel and petrol throughout all of February, diesel pump prices are currently a colossal 20p more than petrol. This means anyone filling a diesel car is, the RAC calculates, paying around £7 more per tank than they should be if diesel was being sold at a fairer price of around 155p a litre. Sales of new diesel cars have been dropping steadily in recent years, since the Volkswagen emissions scandal, while drivers in London have abandoned diesel cars six times faster than those in the rest of the UK since plans to expand the capital’s clean air zone were announced. In the City, hopes that British chip technology firm Arm Ltd could list on the London stock market in 2023 have been dashed. Arm’s owners, Japanese conglomerate SoftBank Group, have said they will pursue a US-only listing this year, ending speculation about a primary or a secondary listing in the UK. Arm isn’t completely ruling out an eventual London listing, saying it intended to consider a subsequent IPO there in due course. But, Arm Chief Executive Officer Rene Haas said in a statement that: “After engagement with the British Government and the Financial Conduct Authority over several months, SoftBank and Arm have determined that pursuing a U.S.-only listing of Arm in 2023 is the best path forward for the company and its stakeholders,” Arm used to be listed in London, before accepting a £24.3bn offer from Softbank in July 2016 (when the slump in the pound after the Brexit vote made it cheaper to buy a UK company). Cambridge-based ARM designs the chips that power most of the world’s smartphones. The decision to float in New York is a blow to the UK government’s efforts to boost the City of London, and to attract more high-tech firms to list here. Victoria Scholar, head of investment at interactive investor, explains: “Softbank-owned Arm said it is aiming for a US IPO this year, as expectations fade that the British chipmaker could be heading for a London-listing. This is a blow to the UK government and the City of London post Brexit as Arm pins its hopes on New York, where some of the world’s biggest tech companies have floated including Apple and Tesla. While the FTSE 100 enjoyed relative resilience last year partly because of its lack of technology giants, allowing it to avoid the ‘tech-wreck’, this has also long been a criticism of the UK blue chip index which has struggled to attract key behemoths in the sector. There have also been some high profile disasters in UK tech with Deliveroo’s IPO flop and THG’s share price slide. Arm’s abandonment of London is another kick in the teeth for the Square Mile’s attractiveness among international investors as a go-to destination for technology giants.” Jeremy Hunt can afford to extend the current energy bill support beyond April, according to Simon French, chief economist at UK investment bank Panmure Gordon. French points out that last September, when the energy price guarantee was announced, the wholesale gas price was about three times the level it is today. UK wholesale gas is trading around 120p per therm today, and was 360p/therm in early September. That means that the amount the Treasury will give to energy companies to cap prices for households and businesses is ‘considerably lower’ than expected in this financial year, and into the next financial year (from April), French told the Today Programme, adding: Do I expect them to reallocate some of that money to keep the energy price guarantee at its current £2500 level for households? Yes I do. It’s clear the energy industry expects government support to continue beyond April, says the BBC’s Simon Jack. He cautions, though, that it isn’t a 100% done deal. But with one company preparing their bills on the expectation that support will be maintained, and others waiting for a decision to be announced, it appears that the pressure from campaigners such as Martin Lewis has had an effect. Jack tells the Today programme: If companies are getting hints that this is going to happen, to the extent they are actually changing their processes and updating their bills in a different way, it’s a pretty clear indication that the intense pressure has actually had an effect and the government is preparing to bow to that pressure. Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of business, the world economy and the financial markets. Hopes are growing that the UK government may reverse plans to lift the cost of energy for households in April. The BBC reports this morning that some energy firms are preparing to amend bills in expectation that the government will keep support at or near current levels. Currently, the Energy Price Guarantee limits the cost of gas and electricity to levels where a typical household bill is £2,500 per year. That limit is set to rise to £3,000 in April, and there have been many calls for ministers to change course and maintain current subsidies. According to the BBC’s Simon Jack, those calls may be heeded. He writes: At the moment, the government is limiting the typical household bill to £2,500 a year, plus a £400 winter discount, which will also end from April. From 1 April the help is scheduled to be scaled back, which will push bills up. Fuel poverty campaigners have said the number of households struggling to afford bills could rise from 6.7 million to 8.4 million as a result of the April rise. However, industry sources told the BBC that some energy companies have already started amending future bills to reflect that energy help will continue at or very near to current levels beyond 1 April. Earlier this week, a Downing Street spokesperson indicated the plan to raise EPG to £3,000 per year was being re-examined, saying: “All I would say on this is it’s something we are just keeping under review.” Money saving expert Martin Lewis predicted earlier this week that Jeremy Hunt could maintain current support, saying there was a ‘better than 50/50 chance’ energy bills will not rise in April. Ofgem, the energy regulator, cut its energy price cap to £3,280, reducing the maximum that a supplier can charge by almost £1,000 per year. That means that the cost to the government of freezing bills is much lower than over the winter, as wholesale energy costs have dropped sharply since their peaks last year. If Hunt doesn’t u-turn, and freeze the EPG at its current level, the cost of living crisis will intensify for millions of households. Citizens Advice predicted this week that unless the government changes course on planned reductions to the level of support for households under the Energy Price Guarantee, the number of people unable to afford their bills will double, from one in 10 to one in five. The agenda 7am GMT: German trade balance for January 9am GMT: Eurozone service sector PMI report for February 9.30am GMT: UK service sector PMI report for February 10am GMT: Eurozone purchasing prices index (PPI) for January 3pm GMT: US service sector PMI report for February 4pm GMT: Andrew Hauser, Bank of England executive director for markets, gives speech on the LDI pension scheme crisis (text released at 11am)
Author: Graeme Wearden
------
Title: How Twitter’s new drastic changes will affect what users can view on the site
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2023/jul/03/how-twitter-new-changes-will-affect-users-rate-limited-limit-exceeded-restrictions
Content: Twitter has limited how much content users can view each day in a move the company’s owner claims is about addressing “system manipulation”. Does this latest move spell the end of the social media platform for good – and where can people go now? What has Elon Musk done to Twitter? Last week Twitter made a number of abrupt changes reducing the usability of the service. First, the company required users to log in to view the site – previously even people without Twitter profiles could view tweets. It then imposed a limit on the vast majority of users who do not pay for the platform, restricting unverified accounts to viewing 600 tweets a day, later upped to 1,000. Why has Twitter made these changes? Musk tweeted that these changes were “temporary limits” designed to address “extreme levels of data scraping” and “system manipulation”. It isn’t clear whether this is what is occurring but data scraping is where automated services, such as AI, scoop up all the publicly available data on a website. Musk tweeted that “almost every company doing AI” was taking “vast amounts of data” from Twitter, which Musk said was forcing the company to deploy more servers – at a cost – to cope with the demand. Generative AI tools such as chatbots and image generation services are based on large language models (LLM), which are “trained” on vast amounts of data take from internet sites including Wikipedia, Twitter and Reddit. One expert said using Twitter for LLM training could be problematic for other reasons. “It’s questionable whether we should continue to use data sources like Twitter – the language and sentiment embodied tends to be terse, often confrontational and contains a lot of disinformation,” says Dr Andrew Rogoyski of the Institute for People-Centred AI at the University of Surrey. “While we as humans know how to filter such data (mostly), training and AI on raw Twitter feeds can lead to problems with the way the AI interacts with people.” Some users believe the view limitation move is an attempt to encourage Twitter Blue subscriptions – where users can view 10,000 tweets daily. Others believe Twitter could have had capacity constraints forced upon it by suppliers who rent server capacity to the company. Twitter’s former head of trust and safety Yoel Roth wrote in a thread on Twitter’s rival Blusky: “It just doesn’t pass the sniff test that scraping all of a sudden created such dramatic performance problems that Twitter had no choice but to put everything behind a login.” He added: “Scraping was the open secret of Twitter data access. We knew about it. It was fine.” What do the Twitter changes mean? Over the weekend, users were hit with “rate limit exceeded” messages after they hit their limit. Some were able to wait a while and refresh their timelines, while others could not view more tweets for the rest of the day. Initially, using the Twitter-owned TweetDeck product bypassed the limits. As of Monday, users reported issues with accessing their feeds on TweetDeck. The changes are likely to affect those who use Twitter as a resource to get immediate breaking news. Where can we go instead? Up until the last few days, Twitter had still had been largely functional and many users had not been pushed to leave the site. But as Twitter makes it harder for users to view tweets, a successor may emerge. One option is Bluesky – launched in February by the former Twitter chief Jack Dorsey. The site had to shut off new sign-ups over the weekend as users began leaving Twitter. New sign-ups were back on as of Monday. Only people with invitation codes from other users can sign up at this stage, and Bluesky stresses it is still in development. It has a similar look and feel to Twitter, and has an app, but currently does not allow direct messaging or allow people to upload videos. Mastodon was also touted as an alternative to Twitter, and while it has built communities in the months since Musk’s takeover, it has not yet replaced Twitter. However, it has received 85,000 new sign-ups over the past day, according to one tracker site, taking the number of accounts to 13m. Twitter has more than 250 million users, according to Musk. It appears that Meta, the company behind Facebook and Instagram, is preparing to step in to fill the gap Twitter is leaving, with reports the text-based app Threads or “Project 92” is about to be released imminently. Screenshots from the app suggest it will look very Twitter-like and allow users to connect with people they follow on Instagram. That would remove one of the biggest hurdles people have had switching from Twitter – finding all the accounts you used to follow. Could the move damage Twitter commercially? The New York Times reported that some Twitter sales employees were asking for advice on what to tell clients as they realised some ads were not being displayed on the platform. The new chief executive of Twitter, Linda Yaccarino, came from the world of TV advertising – signalling that Musk has made rebuilding relationships with advertisers a priority. This latest problem could complicate that process. Before its acquisition by Musk, Twitter had relied on advertising for the majority of its income but some advertisers have either paused or reduced spending because of concerns about how the Tesla chief is running the platform.
Author: Josh Taylor and Dan Milmo
------
Title: Tesla criticised for opening showroom in Xinjiang despite human rights abuses
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/jan/04/tesla-criticised-for-opening-showroom-in-xinjiang-despite-human-rights-abuses
Content: Tesla has opened a new showroom in the capital of Xinjiang, a region at the heart of years-long campaign by Chinese authorities of repression and assimilation against the Uyghur people. Tesla announced the opening in Urumqi with a Weibo post on 31 December saying: “On the last day of 2021, we meet in Xinjiang. In 2022 let us together launch Xinjiang on its electric journey!” The post was accompanied by photos of the opening festivities including people holding placards which read “Tesla [heart] Xinjiang”. The US has enacted a range of sanctions and regulatory and other measures against China over its continuing human rights abuses in Xinjiang, including restrictions on US business dealings with local operators and suppliers. President Joe Biden last month signed the Uyghur Forced Labor Prevention Act, and the US government intends to conduct a diplomatic boycott of the upcoming Beijing Winter Olympics. Uyghur rights groups criticised the opening of the showroom, reportedly Tesla’s 211th in China. The Council on American-Islamic Relations urged its immediate closure, and the cessation of what it alleged “amounts to economic support for genocide”. “No American corporation should be doing business in a region that is the focal point of a campaign of genocide targeting a religious and ethnic minority,” said the council’s director of national communications, Ibrahim Hooper. Human Rights Watch’s Australia researcher, Sophie McNeill, said: “Beijing and businesses have long banked on a global willingness to put profits ahead of human rights, even in the face of crimes against humanity, but we must not allow this to continue in 2022. “Elon Musk and his Tesla executives need to consider human rights in Xinjiang or risk being complicit.” Tesla has been contacted for comment. Tesla’s decision drew some support on Chinese social media, and followed revelations a week earlier that US tech company Intel had requested suppliers not to source goods, services, or labour from the region. One commenter welcomed Tesla’s support for “the development and construction of Xinjiang, unlike some other companies”, an apparent reference to multinationals seeking to reduce business links with Xinjiang over the rights abuses. Last month Intel was accused by state media of offending the Chinese market after it wrote to suppliers requesting they avoid using “any labor or source goods or services from the Xinjiang region”, citing restrictions imposed by multiple governments. After a backlash the company published a letter to “deeply apologise for the confusion”, saying the request was a matter of compliance with US law and didn’t represent its stance on Xinjiang. Commercial operations in China have become fraught as international brands come under increasing pressure to cut ties with Xinjiang suppliers if they can’t guarantee the absence of forced labour or other abuses. Companies including H&amp;M and Intel have been widely criticised or threatened with boycotts in China over their decisions to distance the brand from Xinjiang labour and products. Case studies of such mass online reactions have found the nationalistic backlash is often driven or amplified by Chinese state media and state-linked social media accounts. Xinjiang is the site of a long campaign of forced assimilation by Chinese authorities against ethnic minorities including Muslim Uyghurs. As many as one million people are estimated to have been detained in mass detention and reeducation centres, and the broader population subjected to suppression of religious and cultural activity, intense surveillance and policing, alleged forced labour programs and enforced birth control. Governments including the US have declared the campaign to be genocide, while several human rights and legal groups have said the actions amount to crimes against humanity. Beijing denies all accusations of human rights abuses, and says its policies are part of anti-terrorism efforts and poverty alleviation programs.
Author: Helen Davidson
------
Title: Twitter wins first legal battle with Elon Musk as trial to go ahead in October
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2022/jul/19/elon-musk-delay-trial-denied-twitter-takeover
Content: Twitter has won the first legal skirmish in its attempt to force Elon Musk to complete a $44bn (£36.7bn) takeover of the social media company, after a judge ruled that a trial will take place in October. Legal experts said the ruling in Delaware was good news for Twitter, which had asked for a fast-track process to settle the dispute. A Delaware judge said there was a “cloud of uncertainty” hanging over Twitter and accepted the company’s argument that a delay would cause severe damage to the business. “Delay threatens irreparable harm,” said Chancellor Kathaleen McCormick, the head judge of Delaware’s court of chancery. “The longer the delay, the greater the risk.” McCormick added that the court was able to “quickly process complex litigation.” Twitter is ultimately seeking a legal verdict that will force Musk to go ahead with an agreed transaction that values the company at $54.20 per share. Musk pulled out of the deal this month, citing concerns over the number of spam accounts on the social media platform. A lawyer representing Twitter at the virtual hearing accused Musk of “attempted sabotage”. “He’s doing his best to run Twitter down,” said attorney William Savitt. On 8 July, Musk said he was terminating the deal for three broad reasons: Twitter had breached the agreement by failing to provide enough information on spam accounts; that it had misrepresented the number of spam accounts in its disclosures to the US financial watchdog; and that it had breached the agreement by failing to consult with him when firing senior employees recently. Musk’s attorney, Andrew Rossman, said the accusation that Musk was trying to damage the business was “preposterous”. “He has no interest in damaging the company,” said Rossman, noting the the Tesla chief is Twitter’s second largest shareholder with a far larger stake – at more than 9% – than the entire board. Savitt emphasized the importance of an expedited trial for Twitter to be able to make important business decisions affecting everything from employee retention to relationships with suppliers and customers. He also pointed out that the debt financing supporting the deal expires on 25 April next year, hastening the need for a swift legal resolution. Rossman said more time is needed because it is “one of the largest take-private deals in history” involving a “company that has a massive amount of data that has to be analyzed. Billions of actions on their platform have to be analyzed.” The quicker legal process now gives Musk less time to assemble analysis backing his argument that Twitter has underestimated spam account numbers. McCormick asked the parties to work out the schedule for the October trial, which she said would last five days. Legal observers said the ruling was a boost for Twitter, which is demanding that Musk be held to a legal agreement struck in April to buy the business. “This is a good sign for Twitter,” said Robert Frenchman, a partner at New York law firm Mukasey Frenchman. “The last thing Twitter wants is a long drawn-out fight about the counting and combatting of spam bots, issues that are only tangentially relevant to whether Twitter breached its obligations under the stock purchase agreement.” Commenting on the ruling, Brian Quinn, a professor at Boston College law school, said the ruling was a victory for Twitter, which had been seeking a September trial in Delaware, the US state that is its corporate base. “That’s a win for Twitter. The court granted expedition, not exactly on Twitter’s very aggressive schedule, but very close. October for trial isn’t all that far away and the lawyers will have a lot to do to prep for trial.” Twitter’s argument for closing the deal is encapsulated in its 62-page lawsuit against Musk, in which it argues that the world’s richest man has no proof that its spam accounts are more than 5% of its daily active user base, that it has cooperated with his requests for information related to the spam issues and that its firing of employees was part of the normal course of running the business. Carl Tobias, Williams chair in law at the university of Richmond, said both sides could decide to settle “because as case will consume much time and energy, and distract Twitter and Musk from smoothly operating their essential businesses”. He added that a trial could tarnish both sides. “It may also undermine the parties’ reputations and cause the value of the companies’ stocks to decrease.” Shares in Twitter rose 2.8% in early afternoon trading to $39.48 on Tuesday.
Author: Dan Milmo
------
